# Exploring Linux

Everything in Linux is a file. It uses a tree like hierarchy file system. General files are typical files like audio, image, text, etc. Directory files are a warehouse for other file types, like folders in Windows. System files in Linux are in directories, not on drives, e.g. device files live in the dev directory. Naming is case sensitive. The command line only says something if something goes wrong.

There are three user types of users in Linux:
1. Regular - denoted by $ on the command line. Has limited privileges. 
2. Default user. Cannot access other user files.Root - denoted by # on the command line. Has admin privileges and can access restricted files. Can install software. "Super user"
3. Service - only visible in server editions of Ubuntu. Having service accounts for various services increases security.

Ownership: There are three types of owners in Linux. The first is a user, which is the owner of a file. The second is a group, this can contain multiple users and all users in the group have the same permissions. Other is any other user who has access to a file but not an owner. How do you designate between owners so Linux gives proper permissions to users? Every file has three types of permissions, read, write and, execute.
1. Read allows user to view/display file 
2. Write allows user to change file
3. Execute allows user to run the file

- r = read permission
- w = write perm
- x = execute perm 
- \- = no perm
- d = directory

The first letter designates file or directory. Next three letters designate permissions for the owner. Next three letters designate permissions for the user group. Last letters are for the world permissions.There are two ways to change permissions on a file, absolute and symbolic. Absolute uses numbers 0-7 to represent each combo of permissions.

- 0 = ---
- 1 = --x
- 2 = -w-
- 3 = -wx
- 4 = r--
- 5 = r-x
- 6 = rw-
- 7 = rwx

chmod 764 file1 is example of how to change permissions absolutely.Symbolic mode changes permissions for specific owners.
- \+  adds a permission to a file
- \-  removes permission
- =   sets the permission and overrides previous permissions

Users are denoted:
- u = user/owner
- g = group
- o = other
- a = all

chmod o=rwx file1   adds all permissions for the other users
chmod u-r file1   takes away read perm from owner
sudo chown root file1   changes owner of file1 to be root
sudo chown mark:mark file1   changes owner and user group to mark
sudo chgrp mark file1   changes user group to root2 groups cannot own the same file. 

etc/groups file shows all the groups on your system.‍To install a program in lunix you must install any necessary components unlike windows in which the whole install comes in an executable file.Input and output on Linux is flexible. You can redirect both.ls -al > listing     = this redirects the output of ls -al to a new file called listing. If the file exists then > would override but >> would append. < redirects input.Every file has an FD (file director) associated with it. FD0 is standard inputFD1 is standard outputFD2 is standard errortelnet localhost 2> errorfile      = directs error messages from telnet localhost to a file called errorfile. This type of error redirection helps with cleaning up the cli and not showing every error messagels file > dirlist 2>& err      = >& writes output from one file to input of another so the error output is redirected to standard ouput which in turn is directed to the file dirlist.‍| denotes a pipe and allows you to run 2 commands at the same time. This helps to create powerful commands.cat file | less     = reads the file and starts you at the top instead of the bottomcat file1 | grep ABC      = reds the file and looks for any occurrences of ABCcommand1 | command2      = filtered output from command1 goes to command2‍Regular expressions are special characters that search data and check patterns in strings.cat listings | grep ^a = matches lines that start with acat listings | grep a$ = matches lines that end with agrep -E m\{2} = shows lines where there is an occurence of 2 m's in a rowgrep "a\+t" = filters lines where a preceeds t{} brace expressions allow for expanded expressions like {1..11} results in 1 to 10 ‍Environment variables basically hold a value, be it a string or number, just a piece of information in the linux environmentecho $PATH = displays the variable PATH which contains a colon separated list of directories in which your system looks for executable filesecho $HOME = gives path of users home direcho $VAR = displays all environment varsCreating a new variableNEWVAR=val123Deleting a variableunset NEWVARSetting value of environment variableexport Variable=value‍Communication in linux is fairly simple through the cliPINGThe ping command checks the status of connection to the server. It analyzes network and host connections, and tracks network performance. It tries to send a packet every second to whatever ip address you specify and returns information like how long it took to ping the address and how much packet loss there was. An example would be ping www.google.comFTPUsed to log in and establish a connection with a remote host. You can upload and download files, and navigate through directories. ftp <ip address>ftp passive ignores firewalls and port errorsput file1 = uploads file1 on remote compget file1 = downloads or transfers from the remote computerquit = logs out from computerTELNETConnects to a remote linux comp. You can run programs remotely and conduct admin work. It's similar to remote desktop on windowstelnet <ip address>SSHAllows you to securely connect to a remote computer. It's safer than telnet because the client-server connection is authenticated and passwords are encrypted.SSH username@ip-addressexit logs out of SSHhostname -I prints ip address‍Managing processes:Any command you give to your linux machine starts a new process. There are two types of processes, foreground and background. A text editor and antivirus are examples, respectively. To start a process in the background you start the program normally, press ctrl+z, then type bg. fg brings a process back to the foreground.top = displays all running processes.pid - process id of each taskuser - username of task ownerpr - priorityni - nice valueres - physical memory usedshr - shared memory useds - statusd = uninteruptible sleep, r = running, s = sleeping, t = traces or stopped, z = zombie, i = idle%mem - physical memory usedtime+ = total cpu timecommand = command nameps = snapshot of process status (ps ux)pidof <name> = checks the pid of program nameps PID = checks status of PIDkill PID = kills the process, you have to know the number of the pid‍Niceness is priority in linux. It goes from -20 to 19 and lower niceness is higher priority. Default is 0.nice -n 2 firefox = starts firefix with a priority of 2sudo renice 5 -p PID = you need the pid to change niceness value of the process‍VI editor:It's a specifically linux file editor that exists on basically every linux distro. The editor opens in command mode and ionly understands commands. Moves the cursor, cuts, copies, and saves changes. Insert mode allows you to insert text and you must press 'i' to get into the mode. ESC to save changes in insert mode. 'o' opens a new line. 'a' writes after the cursor. shift zz or :wq saves and quits. :w is for saving and :q is for quitting.‍Shell scripting:The kernel makes communication between hardware abd siftware possible. The shell is the outermost layer of the kernel and is accessed from the terminal. Shell scripting allows users to write a series of commands to combine command and reduce time and effort.Creating a shell script:create a file with a text editor like viname script file with extension .shstart the script with #!/bin/shwrite some codesave the file, making sure its in the form filename.shexecute the script with bash filename.shPerl creates programs, can handle database management and emails, gui dev, and network and sys admin. The benefit of programming with perl is that it doesnt casue portability issues like shell scripting can.$name = "Mark"; = defines a variable name as equal to MarkPrint("wow"); = output$username = <STDIN>; = input# to comment a lineThe process to create a perl script is the same as the shell script but you have to save the file with the extension .pl. You have to run it with perl filename.pl‍Virtual terminals:Allows multiple users to work on the same machine, but you cannot use the mouse on a virtual terminal. ctrl+alt+f2...f6 starts any virtual terminal. f1 is the normal terminal, at least with ubuntu on a virtual machine. ctrl+a move cursor to start of current line, ctrl+e move cursor to end of current line, tab autocomplete commands, ctrl+u erase current line, ctrl+w delete word before cursor, reset resets terminal, history lists of executed commands, ctrl+d logout, ctrl+alt+del reboot.‍Admin stuff:sudo adduser guest = creates a user called guestDeleting a user involves two commands:sudo passwd -l guestsudo userdel -r guestAdding a user a user group:sudo usermod -a -G GROUPNAME USERNAMERemoving a user from a user group:sudo deluser USER GROUPNAMEInstalling GUI group adder:sudo apt-get install gnome-system-toolsfinger = command is used to get user info on the machinefinger mark = gets user info of user markCommands:CTRL + ALT + T = opens terminalecho = display a line of textpwd = present working directory, prints files and directoriescd = change directory, write directory path after cd to travel to directory "cd directory1/directory2"cd .. = moves up one directorycd / = moves to root directorycd ~ = moves to user home directory, can also just type cdls = lists all files are directories in current directoryls -R = shows all files and directories in sub directoriesls -a = shows hidden filesls -al = shows hidden files along with extra info for each filecat = can be used for displaying, copying, combining, and creating text filescat > file1 = creates a file called file1 and waits for you to input text into the file. CTRL + D to return to command linecat file1 = prints file1cat file1 file2 > newfile = combines file1 and file2 into one new file called newfilerm = removes filesrm file1 = deletes file1 filemv = moves files and directories. Needs super user permissionsudo = allows regular user to have security privilege of root user, asks for password authentication. Logs user command history. Password is retained for 15 minutes per terminal.sudo mv file1 home/user/files = moves file1 to files directorymv file1 newfile1 = renames file1 to newfile1mkdir newdirec = creates new directory called newdirec in current directorymkdir tmp/newdirec = creates newdirec in temp directorymkdir dir1 dir2 dir3 = creates the three directories as shownrmdir dir1 = removes dir1 directory, make sure there is no file in dir1man = manual, opens manual on any command you type after the man commandhistory = shows commands used in the past, can press up to run through previous commandsclear = cleans the terminalchmod = changes file permissions.chown = changes ownerchgrp = changes user groupgroups = shows all groups you are a part ofnewgrp = allows you to work as a member of a different group. newgrp cdrom allows you to work and create files from cdrom grouppr = print, helps to format the file as wellpr -3 file1 = prints contents of file1 in 3 columnspr -h HEADER file1 = prints file1 with HEADER as headerpr -n file1 = prints line numbers for file1lp = prints to printer or device, submits fileslp -n3 file1 = sends 3 copies of file1 to printsudo apt-get install SoftwareName = installs softwaremailx = email, need to install mailutils> = redirects output and overwrites if file exists>> = appends output to end of file< = redirects input2> = redirects error messages>& = writes output from one file to input of anothergrep = can scan a document, and can present it how you tell it togrep -v = shows all lines that do not match search stringgrep -c = displays only count of matching linesgrep -n = shows matching line and its numbergrep -i = match both casesgrep -l = shows just the name of the file with the stringsort = sorts the filesort -r = reverse sortsort -n = sorts numericallysort -f = case sensitive sorting. = replaces any character^ = matches start of string$ = matches end of string\+ = matches one or more occurrence of previous character\? = matches zero or one occurrence of previous character{n} = matches preceding character appearing n times exactly{n,m} = matches preceding character not more than m times{n, } = matches preceding character only when it appears n times or moreuname = checks system information like kernel versiondf = reports free disk spacedf -h = makes df more readablefree -m = shows free and used memoryrdesktop -u (user) -p (password) (ip):(port) = remote desktop with login info and ip and oprt info on end
